---
layout:     post
title:      "Thoughts on design patterns"
subtitle:   "thoughts on design patterns and best practices"
date:       2016-11-01 10:05:00
author:     "John O'Malley"
header-img: "img/blog/nodes.png"
description: "thoughts on design patterns and best practices"
---

It's been twenty-two years since the highly influential [Design Patterns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Design_Patterns) was published.  I've been thinking lately about how I and my peers have been influenced, directly and indirectly, by the classic Gang of Four text.  From the mid-90s until around 2011 I was primarily a Java developer.
  
## Java and Design Patterns  

Java came out in May of '95, seven months after the book's publication.  Java is, as far as I know, unique among languages in that it pretty much forces you to use the OO paradigm, at least superficially.  Although *Design Pattern*'s examples were originally written in C++, the book heavily influenced Java core and J2EE libraries (EJBs, Struts, JSF, etc).  Factories and strategies abounded.  Patterns were going to inject much needed discipline into software engineering.

### Spring

A second wave of enterprisey development was arguably kicked off by the release of the [Spring](https://projects.spring.io/spring-framework/) framework in 2003.  Spring was a reaction against the explosion of boilerplate that J2EE technologies such as EJB enabled, and on the surface was a dramatic improvement.  Finally you could create POJOs and simply configure a container in XML to build your services.  Need a security filter on your servlets?  Add some XML.  Need ORM?  More XML.  A few years later the inevitable reaction against XML moved the configuration back into the source code via Java 5 annotations.  

For an organization that was relatively monolithic technology-wise, Spring was probably a good choice.  One could jump from project to project, dive into the XML configuration or the code, and sometimes get a decent overview of a project with relatively little pain.  But a typical Spring application was also likely to be heavily influenced by GoF patterns, and this influence led to some disturbing trends. 

## Example solution using Design Patterns

For example, I used to work in a large Java/Spring/Hibernate shop with lots of shared libraries.  We used Spring's XML configuration so that we could easily import and optionally override shared XML configurations.  One particular shared feature enabled authorization token support for service-to-service calls.  

In most cases it was simply a matter of (1) first seeing if there was an incoming token in the initiating HTTP request that could be reused, and (2) if not, falling back on using an app account and password to generate a token.  A couple of edge cases existed in which the token would be generated in different ways, but in essence it was a simple problem.  The solution to this problem was heavily influenced by familiar patterns:   
 
``` java
public interface TokenProvider {
    String getToken();
}

public class CurrentRequestTokenProvider implements TokenProvider {
    private ThreadLocal<String> currentToken = new ThreadLocal<String>();
    // gets from the thread local 
}
  
public class CredentialsTokenProvider implements TokenProvider {
}

public class StrategyTokenProvider implements TokenProvider {
    public List<TokenProvider> strategies;
    // getter and setter for strategies, first strategy wins   
}
```

``` xml
<bean id="currentRequestTokenProvider" class="com.mycompany.blahblah.CurrentRequestTokenProvider"/>

<bean id="credentialsTokenProvider" class="com.mycompany.blahblah.CredentialsTokenProvider"/>

<bean id="mainTokenProvider" class="com.mycompany.blahblah.StrategyTokenProvider">
    <property name="strategies">
        <list>
            <bean ref="currentRequestTokenProvider"/>
            <bean ref="credentialsTokenProvider"/>
        </list>
    </property>    
</bean>
```

The actual design was far more complex but the problem was only marginally more complex.  We had some legacy baggage that had to be taken into account in some rare edge cases, pushing the number of strategies up to four.

Now this code was written by conscientious engineers that wanted to use standard patterns (Spring, strategy) to provide a shared solution to multiple teams.  Whatever it looks like to you now, you could say a lot of positive things about it at the time.  It was super-flexible and customizable.  It was published to our standard Maven repository.  It was somewhat self-documenting in the sense that any Spring configuration file provides some documentation.  It used a familiar GoF design patterns.

## Problems

In practice, this approach enabled a number of perverse incentives:
 
+ A developers understanding of the solution domain ended up being more important than the problem domain.  
+ The solution made the problem domain seem **far more complex** than it really was.  
+ A single method with maybe *20 lines of code* (maximum) would have been far easier to understand and would have made the problem domain far less opaque.

This example was just the tip of the iceberg.  In practice we had tons of difficult to understand enterprisy code.  The codebase was relatively easy to navigate in IntelliJ - an excellent IDE

Again, it was written by conscientious and talented engineers that were concerned with good design.  But looking back it feels like there was too much [FizzBuzzEnterpriseEdition])(https://github.com/EnterpriseQualityCoding/FizzBuzzEnterpriseEdition) and not enough real engineering.

## Conclusions

I'm going to be daring and draw some general conclusions from the experience:

+ Object Oriented programming went through a period, at least in my experience, in which it was generally assumed to be the best paradigm for most problems. Even now, languages that support and/or encourage the OO paradigm [rank near the top in popularity](https://goo.gl/xizcTG).  Twenty-two years after *Design Patterns*, I personally think it's clear that OO has been overrated in that time.  
+ Bad things can happen when you try to make a solution fit a preselected pattern or try to pick a pattern from your portfolio to attack a problem.  
+ Code sharing and reuse is more challenging than we think it should be.  The best solutions for reusable code are white boxes; when consumers understand why the library solves the problem at hand (at least at a high level), better results will follow all things being equal.
